 Data science is a multi-disciplinary field that uses scientific methods, processes, algorithms and systems to extract knowledge and insights from structured and unstructured data. Data science is the same concept as data mining and big data: "use the most powerful hardware, the most powerful programming systems, and the most efficient algorithms to solve problems". 
 Data science is a "concept to unify statistics, data analysis, machine learning and their related methods" in order to "understand and analyze actual phenomena" with data. It employs techniques and theories drawn from many fields within the context of mathematics, statistics, information science, and computer science. Turing award winner Jim Gray imagined data science as a "fourth paradigm" of science (empirical, theoretical, computational and now data-driven) and asserted that "everything about science is changing because of the impact of information technology" and the data deluge. 
 In 2012, when Harvard Business Review called it "The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century", the term "data science" became a buzzword. It is now often used interchangeably with earlier concepts like business analytics, business intelligence, predictive modeling, and statistics. Even the suggestion that data science is sexy was paraphrasing Hans Rosling, featured in a 2011 BBC documentary with the quote, "Statistics is now the sexiest subject around." Nate Silver referred to data science as a sexed up term for statistics.[10 In many cases, earlier approaches and solutions are now simply rebranded as "data science" to be more attractive, which can cause the term to become "dilute[d beyond usefulness." While many university programs now offer a data science degree, there exists no consensus on a definition or suitable curriculum contents. To its discredit, however, many data-science and big-data projects fail to deliver useful results, often as a result of poor management and utilization of resources. 
 The term "data science" has appeared in various contexts over the past thirty years but did not become an established term until recently. In an early usage, it was used as a substitute for computer science by Peter Naur in 1960. Naur later introduced the term "datalogy". In 1974, Naur published Concise Survey of Computer Methods, which freely used the term data science in its survey of the contemporary data processing methods that are used in a wide range of applications. 
 In 1996, members of the International Federation of Classification Societies (IFCS) met in Kobe for their biennial conference. Here, for the first time, the term data science is included in the title of the conference ("Data Science, classification, and related methods"), after the term was introduced in a roundtable discussion by Chikio Hayashi. 
 In November 1997, C.F. Jeff Wu gave the inaugural lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" for his appointment to the H. C. Carver Professorship at the University of Michigan. In this lecture, he characterized statistical work as a trilogy of data collection, data modeling and analysis, and decision making. In his conclusion, he initiated the modern, non-computer science, usage of the term "data science" and advocated that statistics be renamed data science and statisticians data scientists. Later, he presented his lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" as the first of his 1998 P.C. Mahalanobis Memorial Lectures.[20 These lectures honor Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, an Indian scientist and statistician and founder of the Indian Statistical Institute. 
 In 2001, William S. Cleveland introduced data science as an independent discipline, extending the field of statistics to incorporate "advances in computing with data" in his article "Data Science: An Action Plan for Expanding the Technical Areas of the Field of Statistics," which was published in Volume 69, No. 1, of the April 2001 edition of the International Statistical Review / Revue Internationale de Statistique. In his report, Cleveland establishes six technical areas which he believed to encompass the field of data science: multidisciplinary investigations, models and methods for data, computing with data, pedagogy, tool evaluation, and theory. 
 In April 2002, the International Council for Science (ICSU): Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) started the Data Science Journal, a publication focused on issues such as the description of data systems, their publication on the internet, applications and legal issues. Shortly thereafter, in January 2003, Columbia University began publishing The Journal of Data Science, which provided a platform for all data workers to present their views and exchange ideas. The journal was largely devoted to the application of statistical methods and quantitative research. In 2005, The National Science Board published "Long-lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st Century" defining data scientists as "the information and computer scientists, database and software and programmers, disciplinary experts, curators and expert annotators, librarians, archivists, and others, who are crucial to the successful management of a digital data collection" whose primary activity is to "conduct creative inquiry and analysis." 
 Around 2007,[citation needed Turing award winner Jim Gray envisioned "data-driven science" as a "fourth paradigm" of science that uses the computational analysis of large data as primary scientific method and "to have a world in which all of the science literature is online, all of the science data is online, and they interoperate with each other." 
 In the 2012 Harvard Business Review article "Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century", DJ Patil claims to have coined this term in 2008 with Jeff Hammerbacher to define their jobs at LinkedIn and Facebook, respectively. He asserts that a data scientist is "a new breed", and that a "shortage of data scientists is becoming a serious constraint in some sectors", but describes a much more business-oriented role. 
 In 2013, the IEEE Task Force on Data Science and Advanced Analytics was launched. In 2013, the first "European Conference on Data Analysis (ECDA)" was organised in Luxembourg, establishing the European Association for Data Science (EuADS). The first international conference: IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics was launched in 2014. In 2014, General Assembly launched student-paid bootcamp and The Data Incubator launched a competitive free data science fellowship.[30 In 2014, the American Statistical Association section on Statistical Learning and Data Mining renamed its journal to "Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal" and in 2016 changed its section name to "Statistical Learning and Data Science". In 2015, the International Journal on Data Science and Analytics was launched by Springer to publish original work on data science and big data analytics. In September 2015 the Gesellschaft für Klassifikation (GfKl) added to the name of the Society "Data Science Society" at the third ECDA conference at the University of Essex, Colchester, UK. 
 "Data science" has recently become a popular term among business executives. However, many critical academics and journalists see no distinction between data science and statistics, whereas others consider it largely a popular term for "data mining" and "big data". Writing in Forbes, Gil Press argues that data science is a buzzword without a clear definition and has simply replaced “business analytics” in contexts such as graduate degree programs. In the question-and-answer section of his keynote address at the Joint Statistical Meetings of American Statistical Association, noted applied statistician Nate Silver said, “I think data-scientist is a sexed up term for a statistician....Statistics is a branch of science. Data scientist is slightly redundant in some way and people shouldn’t berate the term statistician.”[10 Similarly, in business sector, multiple researchers and analysts state that data scientists alone are far from being sufficient in granting companies a real competitive advantage and consider data scientists as only one of the four greater job families companies require to leverage big data effectively, namely: data analysts, data scientists, big data developers and big data engineers. 
 On the other hand, responses to criticism are as numerous. In a 2014 Wall Street Journal article, Irving Wladawsky-Berger compares the data science enthusiasm with the dawn of computer science. He argues data science, like any other interdisciplinary field, employs methodologies and practices from across the academia and industry, but then it will morph them into a new discipline. He brings to attention the sharp criticisms computer science, now a well respected academic discipline, had to once face. Likewise, NYU Stern's Vasant Dhar, as do many other academic proponents of data science, argues more specifically in December 2013 that data science is different from the existing practice of data analysis across all disciplines, which focuses only on explaining data sets. Data science seeks actionable and consistent pattern for predictive uses. This practical engineering goal takes data science beyond traditional analytics. Now the data in those disciplines and applied fields that lacked solid theories, like health science and social science, could be sought and utilized to generate powerful predictive models. 
 In an effort similar to Dhar's, Stanford professor David Donoho, in September 2015, takes the proposition further by rejecting three simplistic and misleading definitions of data science in lieu of criticisms. First, for Donoho, data science does not equate to big data, in that the size of the data set is not a criterion to distinguish data science and statistics. Second, data science is not defined by the computing skills of sorting big data sets, in that these skills are already generally used for analyses across all disciplines. Third, data science is a heavily applied field where academic programs right now do not sufficiently prepare data scientists for the jobs, in that many graduate programs misleadingly advertise their analytics and statistics training as the essence of a data science program. As a statistician, Donoho, following many in his field, champions the broadening of learning scope in the form of data science, like John Chambers who urges statisticians to adopt an inclusive concept of learning from data, or like William Cleveland who urges to prioritize extracting from data applicable predictive tools over explanatory theories. Together, these statisticians envision an increasingly inclusive applied field that grows out of traditional statistics and beyond. 
 For the future of data science, Donoho projects an ever-growing environment for open science where data sets used for academic publications are accessible to all researchers. US National Institute of Health has already announced plans to enhance reproducibility and transparency of research data.[40 Other big journals are likewise following suit. This way, the future of data science not only exceeds the boundary of statistical theories in scale and methodology, but data science will revolutionize current academia and research paradigms. As Donoho concludes, "the scope and impact of data science will continue to expand enormously in coming decades as scientific data and data about science itself become ubiquitously available." 
 ^ Naur, Peter (1 July 1966). "The science of datalogy". Communications of the ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:10.1145/365719.366510. 
 ^ International Council for Science: Committee on Data for Science and Technology. (2012, April). CODATA, The Committee on Data for Science and Technology. Retrieved from International Council for Science : Committee on Data for Science and Technology: http://www.codata.org/ 
 ^ Data Science Journal. (2002, April). Contents of Volume 1, Issue 1, April 2002. Retrieved from Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic: http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/browse/dsj/1/0/_contents 
 ^ The Journal of Data Science. (2003, January). Contents of Volume 1, Issue 1, January 2003. Retrieved from http://www.jds-online.com/v1-1 
 ^ Miller, Steven (2014-04-10). "Collaborative Approaches Needed to Close the Big Data Skills Gap". Journal of Organization Design. 3 (1): 26–30. doi:10.7146/jod.9823. ISSN 2245-408X. 
 ^ De Mauro, Andrea; Greco, Marco; Grimaldi, Michele; Ritala, Paavo (2018). "Human resources for Big Data professions: A systematic classification of job roles and required skill sets". Information Processing & Management. 54 (5): 807–817. doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2017.05.004. 
 ^ a b c d e f g h Donoho, David (September 2015). "50 Years of Data Science" (PDF). Based on a Talk at Tukey Centennial Workshop, Princeton NJ Sept 18 2015. 
 ^ Barlow, Mike (2013). The Culture of Big Data. O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
 ^ Chambers, John M. (1993-12-01). "Greater or lesser statistics: a choice for future research". Statistics and Computing. 3 (4): 182–184. doi:10.1007/BF00141776. ISSN 0960-3174. 
 Deep learning models are vaguely inspired by information processing and communication patterns in biological nervous systems yet have various differences from the structural and functional properties of biological brains (especially human brains), which make them incompatible with neuroscience evidences. 
 use a cascade of multiple layers of nonlinear processing units for feature extraction and transformation. Each successive layer uses the output from the previous layer as input. 
 learn in supervised (e.g., classification) and/or unsupervised (e.g., pattern analysis) manners. 
 learn multiple levels of representations that correspond to different levels of abstraction; the levels form a hierarchy of concepts. 
 In deep learning, each level learns to transform its input data into a slightly more abstract and composite representation. In an image recognition application, the raw input may be a matrix of pixels; the first representational layer may abstract the pixels and encode edges; the second layer may compose and encode arrangements of edges; the third layer may encode a nose and eyes; and the fourth layer may recognize that the image contains a face. Importantly, a deep learning process can learn which features to optimally place in which level on its own. (Of course, this does not completely obviate the need for hand-tuning; for example, varying numbers of layers and layer sizes can provide different degrees of abstraction.) 
 The "deep" in "deep learning" refers to the number of layers through which the data is transformed. More precisely, deep learning systems have a substantial credit assignment path (CAP) depth. The CAP is the chain of transformations from input to output. CAPs describe potentially causal connections between input and output. For a feedforward neural network, the depth of the CAPs is that of the network and is the number of hidden layers plus one (as the output layer is also parameterized). For recurrent neural networks, in which a signal may propagate through a layer more than once, the CAP depth is potentially unlimited. No universally agreed upon threshold of depth divides shallow learning from deep learning, but most researchers agree that deep learning involves CAP depth > 2. CAP of depth 2 has been shown to be a universal approximator in the sense that it can emulate any function.[citation needed Beyond that more layers do not add to the function approximator ability of the network. Deep models (CAP > 2) are able to extract better features than shallow models and hence, extra layers help in learning features. 
 For supervised learning tasks, deep learning methods obviate feature engineering, by translating the data into compact intermediate representations akin to principal components, and derive layered structures that remove redundancy in representation. 
 Deep learning algorithms can be applied to unsupervised learning tasks. This is an important benefit because unlabeled data are more abundant than labeled data. Examples of deep structures that can be trained in an unsupervised manner are neural history compressors and deep belief networks. 
 The universal approximation theorem for deep neural networks concerns the capacity of networks with bounded width but the depth is allowed to grow. Lu et al.[20 proved that if the width of a deep neural network with ReLU activation is strictly larger than the input dimension, then the network can approximate any Lebesgue integrable function; If the width is smaller or equal to the input dimension, then deep neural network is not a universal approximator. 
 The term Deep Learning was introduced to the machine learning community by Rina Dechter in 1986, and to artificial neural networks by Igor Aizenberg and colleagues in 2000, in the context of Boolean threshold neurons. 
 The first general, working learning algorithm for supervised, deep, feedforward, multilayer perceptrons was published by Alexey Ivakhnenko and Lapa in 1965. A 1971 paper described a deep network with 8 layers trained by the group method of data handling algorithm. 
 Other deep learning working architectures, specifically those built for computer vision, began with the Neocognitron introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1980.[30 In 1989, Yann LeCun et al. applied the standard backpropagation algorithm, which had been around as the reverse mode of automatic differentiation since 1970, to a deep neural network with the purpose of recognizing handwritten ZIP codes on mail. While the algorithm worked, training required 3 days. 
 By 1991 such systems were used for recognizing isolated 2-D hand-written digits, while recognizing 3-D objects was done by matching 2-D images with a handcrafted 3-D object model. Weng et al. suggested that a human brain does not use a monolithic 3-D object model and in 1992 they published Cresceptron, a method for performing 3-D object recognition in cluttered scenes. Because it directly used natural images, Cresceptron started the beginning of general-purpose visual learning for natural 3D worlds. Cresceptron is a cascade of layers similar to Neocognitron. But while Neocognitron required a human programmer to hand-merge features, Cresceptron learned an open number of features in each layer without supervision, where each feature is represented by a convolution kernel. Cresceptron segmented each learned object from a cluttered scene through back-analysis through the network. Max pooling, now often adopted by deep neural networks (e.g. ImageNet tests), was first used in Cresceptron to reduce the position resolution by a factor of (2x2) to 1 through the cascade for better generalization. 
 In 1994, André de Carvalho, together with Mike Fairhurst and David Bisset, published experimental results of a multi-layer boolean neural network, also known as a weightless neural network, composed of a 3-layers self-organising feature extraction neural network module (SOFT) followed by a multi-layer classification neural network module (GSN), which were independently trained. Each layer in the feature extraction module extracted features with growing complexity regarding the previous layer. 
 Simpler models that use task-specific handcrafted features such as Gabor filters and support vector machines (SVMs) were a popular choice in the 1990s and 2000s, because of artificial neural network's (ANN) computational cost and a lack of understanding of how the brain wires its biological networks. 
 Both shallow and deep learning (e.g., recurrent nets) of ANNs have been explored for many years. These methods never outperformed non-uniform internal-handcrafting Gaussian mixture model/Hidden Markov model (GMM-HMM) technology based on generative models of speech trained discriminatively. Key difficulties have been analyzed, including gradient diminishing and weak temporal correlation structure in neural predictive models. Additional difficulties were the lack of training data and limited computing power. 
 Most speech recognition researchers moved away from neural nets to pursue generative modeling. An exception was at SRI International in the late 1990s. Funded by the US government's NSA and DARPA, SRI studied deep neural networks in speech and speaker recognition. Heck's speaker recognition team achieved the first significant success with deep neural networks in speech processing in the 1998 National Institute of Standards and Technology Speaker Recognition evaluation. While SRI experienced success with deep neural networks in speaker recognition, they were unsuccessful in demonstrating similar success in speech recognition. The principle of elevating "raw" features over hand-crafted optimization was first explored successfully in the architecture of deep autoencoder on the "raw" spectrogram or linear filter-bank features in the late 1990s, showing its superiority over the Mel-Cepstral features that contain stages of fixed transformation from spectrograms. The raw features of speech, waveforms, later produced excellent larger-scale results.[50 
 Many aspects of speech recognition were taken over by a deep learning method called long short-term memory (LSTM), a recurrent neural network published by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber in 1997. LSTM RNNs avoid the vanishing gradient problem and can learn "Very Deep Learning" tasks that require memories of events that happened thousands of discrete time steps before, which is important for speech. In 2003, LSTM started to become competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks. Later it was combined with connectionist temporal classification (CTC) in stacks of LSTM RNNs. In 2015, Google's speech recognition reportedly experienced a dramatic performance jump of 49% through CTC-trained LSTM, which they made available through Google Voice Search. 
 The impact of deep learning in industry began in the early 2000s, when CNNs already processed an estimated 10% to 20% of all the checks written in the US, according to Yann LeCun. Industrial applications of deep learning to large-scale speech recognition started around 2010. 
 The 2009 NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning for Speech Recognition was motivated by the limitations of deep generative models of speech, and the possibility that given more capable hardware and large-scale data sets that deep neural nets (DNN) might become practical. It was believed that pre-training DNNs using generative models of deep belief nets (DBN) would overcome the main difficulties of neural nets.[70 However, it was discovered that replacing pre-training with large amounts of training data for straightforward backpropagation when using DNNs with large, context-dependent output layers produced error rates dramatically lower than then-state-of-the-art Gaussian mixture model (GMM)/Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and also than more-advanced generative model-based systems.[60 The nature of the recognition errors produced by the two types of systems was characteristically different, offering technical insights into how to integrate deep learning into the existing highly efficient, run-time speech decoding system deployed by all major speech recognition systems.[10 Analysis around 2009-2010, contrasted the GMM (and other generative speech models) vs. DNN models, stimulated early industrial investment in deep learning for speech recognition, eventually leading to pervasive and dominant use in that industry. That analysis was done with comparable performance (less than 1.5% in error rate) between discriminative DNNs and generative models.[60[70 
 In 2010, researchers extended deep learning from TIMIT to large vocabulary speech recognition, by adopting large output layers of the DNN based on context-dependent HMM states constructed by decision trees. 
 Advances in hardware enabled the renewed interest. In 2009, Nvidia was involved in what was called the “big bang” of deep learning, “as deep-learning neural networks were trained with Nvidia graphics processing units (GPUs).” That year, Google Brain used Nvidia GPUs to create capable DNNs. While there, Andrew Ng determined that GPUs could increase the speed of deep-learning systems by about 100 times.[80 In particular, GPUs are well-suited for the matrix/vector math involved in machine learning. GPUs speed up training algorithms by orders of magnitude, reducing running times from weeks to days. Specialized hardware and algorithm optimizations can be used for efficient processing. 
 In 2012, a team led by Dahl won the "Merck Molecular Activity Challenge" using multi-task deep neural networks to predict the biomolecular target of one drug. In 2014, Hochreiter's group used deep learning to detect off-target and toxic effects of environmental chemicals in nutrients, household products and drugs and won the "Tox21 Data Challenge" of NIH, FDA and NCATS.[90 
 Significant additional impacts in image or object recognition were felt from 2011 to 2012. Although CNNs trained by backpropagation had been around for decades, and GPU implementations of NNs for years, including CNNs, fast implementations of CNNs with max-pooling on GPUs in the style of Ciresan and colleagues were needed to progress on computer vision. In 2011, this approach achieved for the first time superhuman performance in a visual pattern recognition contest. Also in 2011, it won the ICDAR Chinese handwriting contest, and in May 2012, it won the ISBI image segmentation contest. Until 2011, CNNs did not play a major role at computer vision conferences, but in June 2012, a paper by Ciresan et al. at the leading conference CVPR showed how max-pooling CNNs on GPU can dramatically improve many vision benchmark records. In October 2012, a similar system by Krizhevsky et al. won the large-scale ImageNet competition by a significant margin over shallow machine learning methods. In November 2012, Ciresan et al.'s system also won the ICPR contest on analysis of large medical images for cancer detection, and in the following year also the MICCAI Grand Challenge on the same topic. In 2013 and 2014, the error rate on the ImageNet task using deep learning was further reduced, following a similar trend in large-scale speech recognition. The Wolfram Image Identification project publicized these improvements. 
 Image classification was then extended to the more challenging task of generating descriptions (captions) for images, often as a combination of CNNs and LSTMs. 
 Some researchers assess that the October 2012 ImageNet victory anchored the start of a "deep learning revolution" that has transformed the AI industry. 
 In March 2019, Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton and Yann LeCun were awarded the Turing Award for conceptual and engineering breakthroughs that have made deep neural networks a critical component of computing. 
 Artificial neural networks (ANNs) or connectionist systems are computing systems inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. Such systems learn (progressively improve their ability) to do tasks by considering examples, generally without task-specific programming. For example, in image recognition, they might learn to identify images that contain cats by analyzing example images that have been manually labeled as "cat" or "no cat" and using the analytic results to identify cats in other images. They have found most use in applications difficult to express with a traditional computer algorithm using rule-based programming. 
 An ANN is based on a collection of connected units called artificial neurons, (analogous to biological neurons in a biological brain). Each connection (synapse) between neurons can transmit a signal to another neuron. The receiving (postsynaptic) neuron can process the signal(s) and then signal downstream neurons connected to it. Neurons may have state, generally represented by real numbers, typically between 0 and 1. Neurons and synapses may also have a weight that varies as learning proceeds, which can increase or decrease the strength of the signal that it sends downstream. 
 Typically, neurons are organized in layers. Different layers may perform different kinds of transformations on their inputs. Signals travel from the first (input), to the last (output) layer, possibly after traversing the layers multiple times. 
 The original goal of the neural network approach was to solve problems in the same way that a human brain would. Over time, attention focused on matching specific mental abilities, leading to deviations from biology such as backpropagation, or passing information in the reverse direction and adjusting the network to reflect that information. 
 As of 2017, neural networks typically have a few thousand to a few million units and millions of connections. Despite this number being several order of magnitude less than the number of neurons on a human brain, these networks can perform many tasks at a level beyond that of humans (e.g., recognizing faces, playing "Go"[100 ). 
 A deep neural network (DNN) is an artificial neural network (ANN) with multiple layers between the input and output layers. The DNN finds the correct mathematical manipulation to turn the input into the output, whether it be a linear relationship or a non-linear relationship. The network moves through the layers calculating the probability of each output. For example, a DNN that is trained to recognize dog breeds will go over the given image and calculate the probability that the dog in the image is a certain breed. The user can review the results and select which probabilities the network should display (above a certain threshold, etc.) and return the proposed label. Each mathematical manipulation as such is considered a layer, and complex DNN have many layers, hence the name "deep" networks. The goal is that eventually, the network will be trained to decompose an image into features, identify trends that exist across all samples and classify new images by their similarities without requiring human input.[10 
 DNNs can model complex non-linear relationships. DNN architectures generate compositional models where the object is expressed as a layered composition of primitives.[10 The extra layers enable composition of features from lower layers, potentially modeling complex data with fewer units than a similarly performing shallow network. 
 Deep architectures include many variants of a few basic approaches. Each architecture has found success in specific domains. It is not always possible to compare the performance of multiple architectures, unless they have been evaluated on the same data sets. 
 DNNs are typically feedforward networks in which data flows from the input layer to the output layer without looping back. At first, the DNN creates a map of virtual neurons and assigns random numerical values, or "weights", to connections between them. The weights and inputs are multiplied and return an output between 0 and 1. If the network didn’t accurately recognize a particular pattern, an algorithm would adjust the weights.[10 That way the algorithm can make certain parameters more influential, until it determines the correct mathematical manipulation to fully process the data. 
 As with ANNs, many issues can arise with naively trained DNNs. Two common issues are overfitting and computation time. 
 DNNs are prone to overfitting because of the added layers of abstraction, which allow them to model rare dependencies in the training data. Regularization methods such as Ivakhnenko's unit pruning or weight decay ( ℓ 2 {\displaystyle \ell _{2}} -regularization) or sparsity ( ℓ 1 {\displaystyle \ell _{1}} -regularization) can be applied during training to combat overfitting. Alternatively dropout regularization randomly omits units from the hidden layers during training. This helps to exclude rare dependencies. Finally, data can be augmented via methods such as cropping and rotating such that smaller training sets can be increased in size to reduce the chances of overfitting. 
 DNNs must consider many training parameters, such as the size (number of layers and number of units per layer), the learning rate, and initial weights. Sweeping through the parameter space for optimal parameters may not be feasible due to the cost in time and computational resources. Various tricks, such as batching (computing the gradient on several training examples at once rather than individual examples) speed up computation. Large processing capabilities of many-core architectures (such as, GPUs or the Intel Xeon Phi) have produced significant speedups in training, because of the suitability of such processing architectures for the matrix and vector computations. 
 Alternatively, engineers may look for other types of neural networks with more straightforward and convergent training algorithms. CMAC (cerebellar model articulation controller) is one such kind of neural network. It doesn't require learning rates or randomized initial weights for CMAC. The training process can be guaranteed to converge in one step with a new batch of data, and the computational complexity of the training algorithm is linear with respect to the number of neurons involved. 
 Large-scale automatic speech recognition is the first and most convincing successful case of deep learning. LSTM RNNs can learn "Very Deep Learning" tasks that involve multi-second intervals containing speech events separated by thousands of discrete time steps, where one time step corresponds to about 10 ms. LSTM with forget gates[10 is competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks. 
 The initial success in speech recognition was based on small-scale recognition tasks based on TIMIT. The data set contains 630 speakers from eight major dialects of American English, where each speaker reads 10 sentences. Its small size lets many configurations be tried. More importantly, the TIMIT task concerns phone-sequence recognition, which, unlike word-sequence recognition, allows weak phone bigram language models. This lets the strength of the acoustic modeling aspects of speech recognition be more easily analyzed. The error rates listed below, including these early results and measured as percent phone error rates (PER), have been summarized since 1991. 
 Hierarchical Convolutional Deep Maxout Network 
 16.5 
 The debut of DNNs for speaker recognition in the late 1990s and speech recognition around 2009-2011 and of LSTM around 2003-2007, accelerated progress in eight major areas:[10 
 Scale-up/out and acclerated DNN training and decoding 
 Sequence discriminative training 
 Feature processing by deep models with solid understanding of the underlying mechanisms 
 CNNs and how to design them to best exploit domain knowledge of speech 
 RNN and its rich LSTM variants 
 Other types of deep models including tensor-based models and integrated deep generative/discriminative models. 
 A common evaluation set for image classification is the MNIST database data set. MNIST is composed of handwritten digits and includes 60,000 training examples and 10,000 test examples. As with TIMIT, its small size lets users test multiple configurations. A comprehensive list of results on this set is available. 
 Deep learning-based image recognition has become "superhuman", producing more accurate results than human contestants. This first occurred in 2011. 
 Deep learning-trained vehicles now interpret 360° camera views. Another example is Facial Dysmorphology Novel Analysis (FDNA) used to analyze cases of human malformation connected to a large database of genetic syndromes. 
 Closely related to the progress that has been made in image recognition is the increasing application of deep learning techniques to various visual art tasks. DNNs have proven themselves capable, for example, of a) identifying the style period of a given painting, b) Neural Style Transfer - capturing the style of a given artwork and applying it in a visually pleasing manner to an arbitrary photograph or video, and c) generating striking imagery based on random visual input fields.[130 
 Neural networks have been used for implementing language models since the early 2000s.[10 LSTM helped to improve machine translation and language modeling.[10[10[10 
 Other key techniques in this field are negative sampling and word embedding. Word embedding, such as word2vec, can be thought of as a representational layer in a deep learning architecture that transforms an atomic word into a positional representation of the word relative to other words in the dataset; the position is represented as a point in a vector space. Using word embedding as an RNN input layer allows the network to parse sentences and phrases using an effective compositional vector grammar. A compositional vector grammar can be thought of as probabilistic context free grammar (PCFG) implemented by an RNN. Recursive auto-encoders built atop word embeddings can assess sentence similarity and detect paraphrasing. Deep neural architectures provide the best results for constituency parsing, sentiment analysis, information retrieval, spoken language understanding, machine translation,[10[140 contextual entity linking,[140 writing style recognition, Text classification and others. 
 A large percentage of candidate drugs fail to win regulatory approval. These failures are caused by insufficient efficacy (on-target effect), undesired interactions (off-target effects), or unanticipated toxic effects.[150 Research has explored use of deep learning to predict the biomolecular targets, off-targets, and toxic effects of environmental chemicals in nutrients, household products and drugs.[90 
 Deep reinforcement learning has been used to approximate the value of possible direct marketing actions, defined in terms of RFM variables. The estimated value function was shown to have a natural interpretation as customer lifetime value. 
 Recommendation systems have used deep learning to extract meaningful features for a latent factor model for content-based music recommendations. Multiview deep learning has been applied for learning user preferences from multiple domains. The model uses a hybrid collaborative and content-based approach and enhances recommendations in multiple tasks. 
 In medical informatics, deep learning was used to predict sleep quality based on data from wearables[160 and predictions of health complications from electronic health record data. Deep learning has also showed efficacy in healthcare. 
 Artificial intelligence and deep learning in relation to healthcare[edit 
 In past years the healthcare field has seen benefits from the universalization of artificially intelligent machines to perform tasks (for example, measuring blood pressure), but not to learn how to interpret what we know. This is the major development we are seeing now that could drastically advance our diagnostic abilities. In correlation we might also observe better survival rates for certain diseases as we are able to focus on the prevention of disease, rather than the backwards approach of trying to treat the disease once it has been acquired. This is being done through a variant of artificial intelligence called “deep learning,” in which software “learns to recognize patterns in distinct layers… and each neural-network layer operates both independently and in concert, separating aspects such as color, size and shape before integrating the outcomes” of medical imaging (Forbes, 2018). This advancement in the use of visual tools is vital to the advancement of medical diagnostics. The key idea here is that in past years we’ve only utilized artificial intelligence at its most basic level—by teaching machines to perform human skills. While this has been a great advancement, the new ideas being explored about machine learning and deep learning are having an even greater impact on healthcare now and will continue to yield success upon future discovery. “These newer visual tools hold the promise of transforming diagnostic medicine and can even search for cancer at the individual cell level.” (Forbes, 2018). 
 Finding the appropriate mobile audience for mobile advertising is always challenging, since many data points must be considered and assimilated before a target segment can be created and used in ad serving by any ad server. Deep learning has been used to interpret large, many-dimensioned advertising datasets. Many data points are collected during the request/serve/click internet advertising cycle. This information can form the basis of machine learning to improve ad selection. 
 Deep learning is being successfully applied to financial fraud detection and anti-money laundering. "Deep anti-money laundering detection system can spot and recognize relationships and similarities between data and, further down the road, learn to detect anomalies or classify and predict specific events". The solution leverages both supervised learning techniques, such as the classification of suspicious transactions, and unsupervised learning, e.g. anomaly detection.  
 The United States Department of Defense applied deep learning to train robots in new tasks through observation. 
 Relation to human cognitive and brain development[edit 
 Deep learning is closely related to a class of theories of brain development (specifically, neocortical development) proposed by cognitive neuroscientists in the early 1990s.[170 These developmental theories were instantiated in computational models, making them predecessors of deep learning systems. These developmental models share the property that various proposed learning dynamics in the brain (e.g., a wave of nerve growth factor) support the self-organization somewhat analogous to the neural networks utilized in deep learning models. Like the neocortex, neural networks employ a hierarchy of layered filters in which each layer considers information from a prior layer (or the operating environment), and then passes its output (and possibly the original input), to other layers. This process yields a self-organizing stack of transducers, well-tuned to their operating environment. A 1995 description stated, "...the infant's brain seems to organize itself under the influence of waves of so-called trophic-factors ... different regions of the brain become connected sequentially, with one layer of tissue maturing before another and so on until the whole brain is mature." 
 A variety of approaches have been used to investigate the plausibility of deep learning models from a neurobiological perspective. On the one hand, several variants of the backpropagation algorithm have been proposed in order to increase its processing realism. Other researchers have argued that unsupervised forms of deep learning, such as those based on hierarchical generative models and deep belief networks, may be closer to biological reality. In this respect, generative neural network models have been related to neurobiological evidence about sampling-based processing in the cerebral cortex. 
 Although a systematic comparison between the human brain organization and the neuronal encoding in deep networks has not yet been established, several analogies have been reported. For example, the computations performed by deep learning units could be similar to those of actual neurons and neural populations. Similarly, the representations developed by deep learning models are similar to those measured in the primate visual system[180 both at the single-unit and at the population levels. 
 Google's DeepMind Technologies developed a system capable of learning how to play Atari video games using only pixels as data input. In 2015 they demonstrated their AlphaGo system, which learned the game of Go well enough to beat a professional Go player. Google Translate uses an LSTM to translate between more than 100 languages. 
 In 2015, Blippar demonstrated a mobile augmented reality application that uses deep learning to recognize objects in real time. 
 As of 2008, researchers at The University of Texas at Austin (UT) developed a machine learning framework called Training an Agent Manually via Evaluative Reinforcement, or TAMER, which proposed new methods for robots or computer programs to learn how to perform tasks by interacting with a human instructor. 
 First developed as TAMER, a new algorithm called Deep TAMER was later introduced in 2018 during a collaboration between U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) and UT researchers. Deep TAMER used deep learning to provide a robot the ability to learn new tasks through observation. 
 Using Deep TAMER, a robot learned a task with a human trainer, watching video streams or observing a human perform a task in-person. The robot later practiced the task with the help of some coaching from the trainer, who provided feedback such as “good job” and “bad job.” 
 Deep learning has attracted both criticism and comment, in some cases from outside the field of computer science. 
 A main criticism concerns the lack of theory surrounding some methods.[190 Learning in the most common deep architectures is implemented using well-understood gradient descent. However, the theory surrounding other algorithms, such as contrastive divergence is less clear.[citation needed (e.g., Does it converge? If so, how fast? What is it approximating?) Deep learning methods are often looked at as a black box, with most confirmations done empirically, rather than theoretically. 
 Others point out that deep learning should be looked at as a step towards realizing strong AI, not as an all-encompassing solution. Despite the power of deep learning methods, they still lack much of the functionality needed for realizing this goal entirely. Research psychologist Gary Marcus noted: 
 "Realistically, deep learning is only part of the larger challenge of building intelligent machines. Such techniques lack ways of representing causal relationships (...) have no obvious ways of performing logical inferences, and they are also still a long way from integrating abstract knowledge, such as information about what objects are, what they are for, and how they are typically used. The most powerful A.I. systems, like Watson (...) use techniques like deep learning as just one element in a very complicated ensemble of techniques, ranging from the statistical technique of Bayesian inference to deductive reasoning." 
 As an alternative to this emphasis on the limits of deep learning, one author speculated that it might be possible to train a machine vision stack to perform the sophisticated task of discriminating between "old master" and amateur figure drawings, and hypothesized that such a sensitivity might represent the rudiments of a non-trivial machine empathy. This same author proposed that this would be in line with anthropology, which identifies a concern with aesthetics as a key element of behavioral modernity. 
 In further reference to the idea that artistic sensitivity might inhere within relatively low levels of the cognitive hierarchy, a published series of graphic representations of the internal states of deep (20-30 layers) neural networks attempting to discern within essentially random data the images on which they were trained demonstrate a visual appeal: the original research notice received well over 1,000 comments, and was the subject of what was for a time the most frequently accessed article on The Guardian's web site. 
 Some deep learning architectures display problematic behaviors, such as confidently classifying unrecognizable images as belonging to a familiar category of ordinary images and misclassifying minuscule perturbations of correctly classified images. Goertzel hypothesized that these behaviors are due to limitations in their internal representations and that these limitations would inhibit integration into heterogeneous multi-component artificial general intelligence (AGI) architectures. These issues may possibly be addressed by deep learning architectures that internally form states homologous to image-grammar[200 decompositions of observed entities and events. Learning a grammar (visual or linguistic) from training data would be equivalent to restricting the system to commonsense reasoning that operates on concepts in terms of grammatical production rules and is a basic goal of both human language acquisition[20 and artificial intelligence (AI).[20 
 As deep learning moves from the lab into the world, research and experience shows that artificial neural networks are vulnerable to hacks and deception. By identifying patterns that these systems use to function, attackers can modify inputs to ANNs in such a way that the ANN finds a match that human observers would not recognize. For example, an attacker can make subtle changes to an image such that the ANN finds a match even though the image looks to a human nothing like the search target. Such a manipulation is termed an “adversarial attack.” In 2016 researchers used one ANN to doctor images in trial and error fashion, identify another's focal points and thereby generate images that deceived it. The modified images looked no different to human eyes. Another group showed that printouts of doctored images then photographed successfully tricked an image classification system.[20 One defense is reverse image search, in which a possible fake image is submitted to a site such as TinEye that can then find other instances of it. A refinement is to search using only parts of the image, to identify images from which that piece may have been taken.[20 
 Another group showed that certain psychedelic spectacles could fool a facial recognition system into thinking ordinary people were celebrities, potentially allowing one person to impersonate another. In 2017 researchers added stickers to stop signs and caused an ANN to misclassify them.[20 
 ANNs can however be further trained to detect attempts at deception, potentially leading attackers and defenders into an arms race similar to the kind that already defines the malware defense industry. ANNs have been trained to defeat ANN-based anti-malware software by repeatedly attacking a defense with malware that was continually altered by a genetic algorithm until it tricked the anti-malware while retaining its ability to damage the target.[20 
 Another group demonstrated that certain sounds could make the Google Now voice command system open a particular web address that would download malware.[20 
 In “data poisoning”, false data is continually smuggled into a machine learning system’s training set to prevent it from achieving mastery.[20 
 ^ a b c d e f Bengio, Y.; Courville, A.; Vincent, P. (2013). "Representation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives". IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 35 (8): 1798–1828. arXiv:1206.5538. doi:10.1109/tpami.2013.50. PMID 23787338. 
 ^ a b Jürgen Schmidhuber (2015). Deep Learning. Scholarpedia, 10(11):32832. Online 
 ^ a b Balázs Csanád Csáji (2001). Approximation with Artificial Neural Networks; Faculty of Sciences; Eötvös Loránd University, Hungary 
 ^ Rina Dechter (1986). Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction problems. University of California, Computer Science Department, Cognitive Systems Laboratory.Online 
 ^ Igor Aizenberg, Naum N. Aizenberg, Joos P.L. Vandewalle (2000). Multi-Valued and Universal Binary Neurons: Theory, Learning and Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. 
 ^ Co-evolving recurrent neurons learn deep memory POMDPs. Proc. GECCO, Washington, D. C., pp. 1795-1802, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 2005. 
 ^ a b Ivakhnenko, Alexey (1971). "Polynomial theory of complex systems". IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. 1 (4): 364–378. doi:10.1109/TSMC.1971.4308320. 
 ^ Fukushima, K. (1980). "Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position". Biol. Cybern. 36 (4): 193–202. doi:10.1007/bf00344251. PMID 7370364. 
 ^ Seppo Linnainmaa (1970). The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local rounding errors. Master's Thesis (in Finnish), Univ. Helsinki, 6-7. 
 ^ a b LeCun et al., "Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition," Neural Computation, 1, pp. 541–551, 1989. 
 ^ de Carvalho, Andre C. L. F.; Fairhurst, Mike C.; Bisset, David (1994-08-08). "An integrated Boolean neural network for pattern classification". Pattern Recognition Letters. 15 (8): 807–813. doi:10.1016/0167-8655(94)90009-4. 
 ^ Morgan, Nelson; Bourlard, Hervé; Renals, Steve; Cohen, Michael; Franco, Horacio (1993-08-01). "Hybrid neural network/hidden markov model systems for continuous speech recognition". International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence. 07 (4): 899–916. doi:10.1142/s0218001493000455. ISSN 0218-0014. 
 ^ Waibel, A.; Hanazawa, T.; Hinton, G.; Shikano, K.; Lang, K. J. (March 1989). "Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks". IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. 37 (3): 328–339. doi:10.1109/29.21701. ISSN 0096-3518. 
 ^ Baker, J.; Deng, Li; Glass, Jim; Khudanpur, S.; Lee, C.-H.; Morgan, N.; O'Shaughnessy, D. (2009). "Research Developments and Directions in Speech Recognition and Understanding, Part 1". IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 26 (3): 75–80. Bibcode:2009ISPM...26...75B. doi:10.1109/msp.2009.932166. 
 ^ Deng, L.; Hassanein, K.; Elmasry, M. (1994). "Analysis of correlation structure for a neural predictive model with applications to speech recognition". Neural Networks. 7 (2): 331–339. doi:10.1016/0893-6080(94)90027-2. 
 ^ a b Heck, L.; Konig, Y.; Sonmez, M.; Weintraub, M. (2000). "Robustness to Telephone Handset Distortion in Speaker Recognition by Discriminative Feature Design". Speech Communication. 31 (2): 181–192. doi:10.1016/s0167-6393(99)00077-1. 
 ^ a b Graves, Alex; Eck, Douglas; Beringer, Nicole; Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2003). "Biologically Plausible Speech Recognition with LSTM Neural Nets" (PDF). 1st Intl. Workshop on Biologically Inspired Approaches to Advanced Information Technology, Bio-ADIT 2004, Lausanne, Switzerland. pp. 175–184. 
 ^ a b Graves, Alex; Fernández, Santiago; Gomez, Faustino (2006). "Connectionist temporal classification: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks". Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2006: 369–376. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.75.6306. 
 ^ a b c Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.; Mohamed, A.; Jaitly, N.; Senior, A.; Vanhoucke, V.; Nguyen, P.; Sainath, T.; Kingsbury, B. (2012). "Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition --- The shared views of four research groups". IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 29 (6): 82–97. doi:10.1109/msp.2012.2205597. 
 ^ Li, Xiangang; Wu, Xihong (2014). "Constructing Long Short-Term Memory based Deep Recurrent Neural Networks for Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition". arXiv:1410.4281 [cs.CL. 
 ^ a b c NIPS Workshop: Deep Learning for Speech Recognition and Related Applications, Whistler, BC, Canada, Dec. 2009 (Organizers: Li Deng, Geoff Hinton, D. Yu). 
 ^ a b Keynote talk: Recent Developments in Deep Neural Networks. ICASSP, 2013 (by Geoff Hinton). 
 ^ D. Yu, L. Deng, G. Li, and F. Seide (2011). "Discriminative pretraining of deep neural networks," U.S. Patent Filing. 
 ^ a b Oh, K.-S.; Jung, K. (2004). "GPU implementation of neural networks". Pattern Recognition. 37 (6): 1311–1314. doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2004.01.013. 
 ^ a b Chellapilla, K., Puri, S., and Simard, P. (2006). High performance convolutional neural networks for document processing. International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition. 
 ^ Cireşan, Dan Claudiu; Meier, Ueli; Gambardella, Luca Maria; Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2010-09-21). "Deep, Big, Simple Neural Nets for Handwritten Digit Recognition". Neural Computation. 22 (12): 3207–3220. arXiv:1003.0358. doi:10.1162/neco_a_00052. ISSN 0899-7667. PMID 20858131. 
 ^ Raina, Rajat; Madhavan, Anand; Ng, Andrew Y. (2009). "Large-scale Deep Unsupervised Learning Using Graphics Processors". Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML '09. New York, NY, USA: ACM: 873–880. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.154.372. doi:10.1145/1553374.1553486. ISBN 9781605585161. 
 ^ Sze, Vivienne; Chen, Yu-Hsin; Yang, Tien-Ju; Emer, Joel (2017). "Efficient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey". arXiv:1703.09039 [cs.CV. 
 ^ Ciresan, Dan; Giusti, Alessandro; Gambardella, Luca M.; Schmidhuber, Juergen (2012). Pereira, F.; Burges, C. J. C.; Bottou, L.; Weinberger, K. Q., eds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 (PDF). Curran Associates, Inc. pp. 2843–2851. 
 ^ Ciresan, D.; Giusti, A.; Gambardella, L.M.; Schmidhuber, J. (2013). "Mitosis Detection in Breast Cancer Histology Images using Deep Neural Networks". Proceedings MICCAI. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 7908: 411–418. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40763-5_51. ISBN 978-3-642-38708-1. 
 ^ Vinyals, Oriol; Toshev, Alexander; Bengio, Samy; Erhan, Dumitru (2014). "Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator". arXiv:1411.4555 [cs.CV.. 
 ^ Fang, Hao; Gupta, Saurabh; Iandola, Forrest; Srivastava, Rupesh; Deng, Li; Dollár, Piotr; Gao, Jianfeng; He, Xiaodong; Mitchell, Margaret; Platt, John C; Lawrence Zitnick, C; Zweig, Geoffrey (2014). "From Captions to Visual Concepts and Back". arXiv:1411.4952 [cs.CV.. 
 ^ Kiros, Ryan; Salakhutdinov, Ruslan; Zemel, Richard S (2014). "Unifying Visual-Semantic Embeddings with Multimodal Neural Language Models". arXiv:1411.2539 [cs.LG.. 
 ^ Zhong, Sheng-hua; Liu, Yan; Liu, Yang (2011). "Bilinear Deep Learning for Image Classification". Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. MM '11. New York, NY, USA: ACM: 343–352. doi:10.1145/2072298.2072344. ISBN 9781450306164. 
 ^ Silver, David; Huang, Aja; Maddison, Chris J.; Guez, Arthur; Sifre, Laurent; Driessche, George van den; Schrittwieser, Julian; Antonoglou, Ioannis; Panneershelvam, Veda (January 2016). "Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search". Nature. 529 (7587): 484–489. Bibcode:2016Natur.529..484S. doi:10.1038/nature16961. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 26819042. 
 ^ a b Gers, Felix A.; Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2001). "LSTM Recurrent Networks Learn Simple Context Free and Context Sensitive Languages". IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 12 (6): 1333–1340. doi:10.1109/72.963769. PMID 18249962. 
 ^ a b Jozefowicz, Rafal; Vinyals, Oriol; Schuster, Mike; Shazeer, Noam; Wu, Yonghui (2016). "Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling". arXiv:1602.02410 [cs.CL. 
 ^ a b Gillick, Dan; Brunk, Cliff; Vinyals, Oriol; Subramanya, Amarnag (2015). "Multilingual Language Processing from Bytes". arXiv:1512.00103 [cs.CL. 
 ^ LeCun, Y.; et al. (1998). "Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition". Proceedings of the IEEE. 86 (11): 2278–2324. doi:10.1109/5.726791. 
 ^ Viebke, André; Memeti, Suejb; Pllana, Sabri; Abraham, Ajith (March 2017). "CHAOS: a parallelization scheme for training convolutional neural networks on Intel Xeon Phi". The Journal of Supercomputing. 75: 197–227. doi:10.1007/s11227-017-1994-x. 
 ^ Ting Qin, et al. "A learning algorithm of CMAC based on RLS." Neural Processing Letters 19.1 (2004): 49-61. 
 ^ TIMIT Acoustic-Phonetic Continuous Speech Corpus Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia. 
 ^ Robinson, Tony (30 September 1991). "Several Improvements to a Recurrent Error Propagation Network Phone Recognition System". Cambridge University Engineering Department Technical Report. CUED/F-INFENG/TR82. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.15418.90567. 
 ^ Abdel-Hamid, O.; et al. (2014). "Convolutional Neural Networks for Speech Recognition". IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing. 22 (10): 1533–1545. doi:10.1109/taslp.2014.2339736. 
 ^ Tóth, Laszló (2015). "Phone Recognition with Hierarchical Convolutional Deep Maxout Networks". EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing. 2015. doi:10.1186/s13636-015-0068-3. 
 ^ Cireşan, Dan; Meier, Ueli; Masci, Jonathan; Schmidhuber, Jürgen (August 2012). "Multi-column deep neural network for traffic sign classification". Neural Networks. Selected Papers from IJCNN 2011. 32: 333–338. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.226.8219. doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2012.02.023. PMID 22386783. 
 ^ a b Socher, Richard; Manning, Christopher. "Deep Learning for NLP" (PDF). Retrieved 26 October 2014. 
 ^ Brocardo, Marcelo Luiz; Traore, Issa; Woungang, Isaac; Obaidat, Mohammad S. (2017). "Authorship verification using deep belief network systems". International Journal of Communication Systems. 30 (12): e3259. doi:10.1002/dac.3259. 
 ^ a b Boitet, Christian; Blanchon, Hervé; Seligman, Mark; Bellynck, Valérie (2010). "MT on and for the Web" (PDF). Retrieved December 1, 2016. 
 ^ Arrowsmith, J; Miller, P (2013). "Trial watch: Phase II and phase III attrition rates 2011-2012". Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 12 (8): 569. doi:10.1038/nrd4090. PMID 23903212. 
 ^ Verbist, B; Klambauer, G; Vervoort, L; Talloen, W; The Qstar, Consortium; Shkedy, Z; Thas, O; Bender, A; Göhlmann, H. W.; Hochreiter, S (2015). "Using transcriptomics to guide lead optimization in drug discovery projects: Lessons learned from the QSTAR project". Drug Discovery Today. 20 (5): 505–513. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2014.12.014. PMID 25582842. 
 ^ Wallach, Izhar; Dzamba, Michael; Heifets, Abraham (2015-10-09). "AtomNet: A Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Bioactivity Prediction in Structure-based Drug Discovery". arXiv:1510.02855 [cs.LG. 
 ^ Tkachenko, Yegor (April 8, 2015). "Autonomous CRM Control via CLV Approximation with Deep Reinforcement Learning in Discrete and Continuous Action Space". arXiv:1504.01840 [cs.LG. 
 ^ van den Oord, Aaron; Dieleman, Sander; Schrauwen, Benjamin (2013). Burges, C. J. C.; Bottou, L.; Welling, M.; Ghahramani, Z.; Weinberger, K. Q., eds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 (PDF). Curran Associates, Inc. pp. 2643–2651. 
 ^ Chicco, Davide; Sadowski, Peter; Baldi, Pierre (1 January 2014). Deep Autoencoder Neural Networks for Gene Ontology Annotation Predictions. Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics - BCB '14. ACM. pp. 533–540. doi:10.1145/2649387.2649442. hdl:11311/964622. ISBN 9781450328944. 
 ^ Shrager, J.; Johnson, MH (1996). "Dynamic plasticity influences the emergence of function in a simple cortical array". Neural Networks. 9 (7): 1119–1129. doi:10.1016/0893-6080(96)00033-0. PMID 12662587. 
 ^ Quartz, SR; Sejnowski, TJ (1997). "The neural basis of cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto". Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 20 (4): 537–556. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.41.7854. doi:10.1017/s0140525x97001581. 
 ^ S. Blakeslee., "In brain's early growth, timetable may be critical," The New York Times, Science Section, pp. B5–B6, 1995. 
 ^ Testolin, Alberto; Stoianov, Ivilin; Zorzi, Marco (September 2017). "Letter perception emerges from unsupervised deep learning and recycling of natural image features". Nature Human Behaviour. 1 (9): 657–664. doi:10.1038/s41562-017-0186-2. ISSN 2397-3374. 
 ^ Morel, Danielle; Singh, Chandan; Levy, William B. (2018-01-25). "Linearization of excitatory synaptic integration at no extra cost". Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 44 (2): 173–188. doi:10.1007/s10827-017-0673-5. ISSN 0929-5313. PMID 29372434. 
 ^ Yamins, Daniel L K; DiCarlo, James J (March 2016). "Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand sensory cortex". Nature Neuroscience. 19 (3): 356–365. doi:10.1038/nn.4244. ISSN 1546-1726. 
 ^ Güçlü, Umut; van Gerven, Marcel A. J. (2015-07-08). "Deep Neural Networks Reveal a Gradient in the Complexity of Neural Representations across the Ventral Stream". Journal of Neuroscience. 35 (27): 10005–10014. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.5023-14.2015. PMID 26157000. 
 ^ Smith, G. W. (March 27, 2015). "Art and Artificial Intelligence". ArtEnt. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2015.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) 
 ^ Nguyen, Anh; Yosinski, Jason; Clune, Jeff (2014). "Deep Neural Networks are Easily Fooled: High Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images". arXiv:1412.1897 [cs.CV. 
 ^ Szegedy, Christian; Zaremba, Wojciech; Sutskever, Ilya; Bruna, Joan; Erhan, Dumitru; Goodfellow, Ian; Fergus, Rob (2013). "Intriguing properties of neural networks". arXiv:1312.6199 [cs.CV. 
 ^ Miller, G. A., and N. Chomsky. "Pattern conception." Paper for Conference on pattern detection, University of Michigan. 1957. 
 Software development is the process of conceiving, specifying, designing, programming, documenting, testing, and bug fixing involved in creating and maintaining applications, frameworks, or other software components. Software development is a process of writing and maintaining the source code, but in a broader sense, it includes all that is involved between the conception of the desired software through to the final manifestation of the software, sometimes in a planned and structured process. Therefore, software development may include research, new development, prototyping, modification, reuse, re-engineering, maintenance, or any other activities that result in software products. 
 Software can be developed for a variety of purposes, the three most common being to meet specific needs of a specific client/business (the case with custom software), to meet a perceived need of some set of potential users (the case with commercial and open source software), or for personal use (e.g. a scientist may write software to automate a mundane task). Embedded software development, that is, the development of embedded software, such as used for controlling consumer products, requires the development process to be integrated with the development of the controlled physical product. System software underlies applications and the programming process itself, and is often developed separately. 
 The need for better quality control of the software development process has given rise to the discipline of software engineering, which aims to apply the systematic approach exemplified in the engineering paradigm to the process of software development. 
 There are many approaches to software project management, known as software development life cycle models, methodologies, processes, or models. The waterfall model is a traditional version, contrasted with the more recent innovation of agile software development. 
 A software development process (also known as a software development methodology, model, or life cycle) is a framework that is used to structure, plan, and control the process of developing information systems. A wide variety of such frameworks has evolved over the years, each with its own recognized strengths and weaknesses. There are several different approaches to software development: some take a more structured, engineering-based approach to develop business solutions, whereas others may take a more incremental approach, where software evolves as it is developed piece-by-piece. One system development methodology is not necessarily suitable for use by all projects. Each of the available methodologies is best suited to specific kinds of projects, based on various technical, organizational, project and team considerations.  
 Most methodologies share some combination of the following stages of software development: 
 Analyzing the problem 
 Market research 
 Gathering requirements for the proposed business solution 
 Devising a plan or design for the software-based solution 
 These stages are often referred to collectively as the software development life-cycle, or SDLC. Different approaches to software development may carry out these stages in different orders, or devote more or less time to different stages. The level of detail of the documentation produced at each stage of software development may also vary. These stages may also be carried out in turn (a “waterfall” based approach), or they may be repeated over various cycles or iterations (a more "extreme" approach). The more extreme approach usually involves less time spent on planning and documentation, and more time spent on coding and development of automated tests. More “extreme” approaches also promote continuous testing throughout the development life-cycle, as well as having a working (or bug-free) product at all times. More structured or “waterfall” based approaches attempt to assess the majority of risks and develop a detailed plan for the software before implementation (coding) begins, and avoid significant design changes and re-coding in later stages of the software development life-cycle planning. 
 There are significant advantages and disadvantages to the various methodologies, and the best approach to solving a problem using software will often depend on the type of problem. If the problem is well understood and a solution can be effectively planned out ahead of time, the more "waterfall" based approach may work the best. If, on the other hand, the problem is unique (at least to the development team) and the structure of the software solution cannot be easily envisioned, then a more "extreme" incremental approach may work best. 
 The sources of ideas for software products are plentiful. These ideas can come from market research including the demographics of potential new customers, existing customers, sales prospects who rejected the product, other internal software development staff, or a creative third party. Ideas for software products are usually first evaluated by marketing personnel for economic feasibility, for fit with existing channels distribution, for possible effects on existing product lines, required features, and for fit with the company's marketing objectives. In a marketing evaluation phase, the cost and time assumptions become evaluated. A decision is reached early in the first phase as to whether, based on the more detailed information generated by the marketing and development staff, the project should be pursued further. 
 In the book "Great Software Debates", Alan M. Davis states in the chapter "Requirements", sub-chapter "The Missing Piece of Software Development" 
 Students of engineering learn engineering and are rarely exposed to finance or marketing. Students of marketing learn marketing and are rarely exposed to finance or engineering. Most of us become specialists in just one area. To complicate matters, few of us meet interdisciplinary people in the workforce, so there are few roles to mimic. Yet, software product planning is critical to the development success and absolutely requires knowledge of multiple disciplines. 
 Planning is an objective of each and every activity, where we want to discover things that belong to the project. An important task in creating a software program is extracting the requirements or requirements analysis. Customers typically have an abstract idea of what they want as an end result but do not know what software should do. Skilled and experienced software engineers recognize incomplete, ambiguous, or even contradictory requirements at this point. Frequently demonstrating live code may help reduce the risk that the requirements are incorrect. 
 "Although much effort is put in the requirements phase to ensure that requirements are complete and consistent, rarely that is the case; leaving the software design phase as the most influential one when it comes to minimizing the effects of new or changing requirements. Requirements volatility is challenging because they impact future or already going development efforts." 
 Once the general requirements are gathered from the client, an analysis of the scope of the development should be determined and clearly stated. This is often called a scope document. 
 Once the requirements are established, the design of the software can be established in a software design document. This involves a preliminary or high-level design of the main modules with an overall picture (such as a block diagram) of how the parts fit together. The language, operating system, and hardware components should all be known at this time. Then a detailed or low-level design is created, perhaps with prototyping as proof-of-concept or to firm up requirements. 
 Software testing is an integral and important phase of the software development process. This part of the process ensures that defects are recognized as soon as possible. In some processes, generally known as test-driven development, tests may be developed just before implementation and serve as a guide for the implementation's correctness. 
 Documenting the internal design of software for the purpose of future maintenance and enhancement is done throughout development. This may also include the writing of an API, be it external or internal. The software engineering process chosen by the developing team will determine how much internal documentation (if any) is necessary. Plan-driven models (e.g., Waterfall) generally produce more documentation than Agile models. 
 Deployment starts directly after the code is appropriately tested, approved for release, and sold or otherwise distributed into a production environment. This may involve installation, customization (such as by setting parameters to the customer's values), testing, and possibly an extended period of evaluation.[citation needed 
 Software training and support is important, as software is only effective if it is used correctly.[citation needed 
 Maintaining and enhancing software to cope with newly discovered faults or requirements can take substantial time and effort, as missed requirements may force redesign of the software.[citation needed 
 The purpose of viewpoints and views is to enable human engineers to comprehend very complex systems and to organize the elements of the problem and the solution around domains of expertise. In the engineering of physically intensive systems, viewpoints often correspond to capabilities and responsibilities within the engineering organization. 
 Most complex system specifications are so extensive that no one individual can fully comprehend all aspects of the specifications. Furthermore, we all have different interests in a given system and different reasons for examining the system's specifications. A business executive will ask different questions of a system make-up than would a system implementer. The concept of viewpoints framework, therefore, is to provide separate viewpoints into the specification of a given complex system. These viewpoints each satisfy an audience with interest in some set of aspects of the system. Associated with each viewpoint is a viewpoint language that optimizes the vocabulary and presentation for the audience of that viewpoint. 
 Graphical representation of the current state of information provides a very effective means for presenting information to both users and system developers. 
 example of the interaction between business process and data models. 
 A business model illustrates the functions associated with the business process being modeled and the organizations that perform these functions. By depicting activities and information flows, a foundation is created to visualize, define, understand, and validate the nature of a process. 
 A data model provides the details of information to be stored and is of primary use when the final product is the generation of computer software code for an application or the preparation of a functional specification to aid a computer software make-or-buy decision. See the figure on the right for an example of the interaction between business process and data models. 
 Usually, a model is created after conducting an interview, referred to as business analysis. The interview consists of a facilitator asking a series of questions designed to extract required information that describes a process. The interviewer is called a facilitator to emphasize that it is the participants who provide the information. The facilitator should have some knowledge of the process of interest, but this is not as important as having a structured methodology by which the questions are asked of the process expert. The methodology is important because usually a team of facilitators is collecting information across the facility and the results of the information from all the interviewers must fit together once completed. 
 The models are developed as defining either the current state of the process, in which case the final product is called the "as-is" snapshot model, or a collection of ideas of what the process should contain, resulting in a "what-can-be" model. Generation of process and data models can be used to determine if the existing processes and information systems are sound and only need minor modifications or enhancements, or if re-engineering is required as a corrective action. The creation of business models is more than a way to view or automate your information process. Analysis can be used to fundamentally reshape the way your business or organization conducts its operations. 
 Computer-aided software engineering (CASE), in the field software engineering, is the scientific application of a set of software tools and methods to the development of software which results in high-quality, defect-free, and maintainable software products.[10 It also refers to methods for the development of information systems together with automated tools that can be used in the software development process. The term "computer-aided software engineering" (CASE) can refer to the software used for the automated development of systems software, i.e., computer code. The CASE functions include analysis, design, and programming. CASE tools automate methods for designing, documenting, and producing structured computer code in the desired programming language. 
 Two key ideas of Computer-aided Software System Engineering (CASE) are: 
 Foster computer assistance in software development and software maintenance processes, and 
 An engineering approach to software development and maintenance. 
 IDEs are designed to maximize programmer productivity by providing tight-knit components with similar user interfaces. Typically an IDE is dedicated to a specific programming language, so as to provide a feature set which most closely matches the programming paradigms of the language. 
 A modeling language is any artificial language that can be used to express information or knowledge or systems in a structure that is defined by a consistent set of rules. The rules are used for interpretation of the meaning of components in the structure. A modeling language can be graphical or textual. Graphical modeling languages use a diagram techniques with named symbols that represent concepts and lines that connect the symbols and that represent relationships and various other graphical annotation to represent constraints. Textual modeling languages typically use standardised keywords accompanied by parameters to make computer-interpretable expressions. 
 Examples of graphical modelling languages in the field of software engineering are: 
 EXPRESS and EXPRESS-G (ISO 10303-11) is an international standard general-purpose data modeling language. 
 IDEF is a family of modeling languages, the most notable of which include IDEF0 for functional modeling, IDEF1X for information modeling, and IDEF5 for modeling ontologies. 
 Specification and Description Language(SDL) is a specification language targeted at the unambiguous specification and description of the behaviour of reactive and distributed systems. 
 Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a general-purpose modeling language that is an industry standard for specifying software-intensive systems. UML 2.0, the current version, supports thirteen different diagram techniques and has widespread tool support. 
 Not all modeling languages are executable, and for those that are, using them doesn't necessarily mean that programmers are no longer needed. On the contrary, executable modeling languages are intended to amplify the productivity of skilled programmers, so that they can address more difficult problems, such as parallel computing and distributed systems. 
 A programming paradigm is a fundamental style of computer programming, which is not generally dictated by the project management methodology (such as waterfall or agile). Paradigms differ in the concepts and abstractions used to represent the elements of a program (such as objects, functions, variables, constraints) and the steps that comprise a computation (such as assignations, evaluation, continuations, data flows). Sometimes the concepts asserted by the paradigm are utilized cooperatively in high-level system architecture design; in other cases, the programming paradigm's scope is limited to the internal structure of a particular program or module. 
 A programming language can support multiple paradigms. For example, programs written in C++ or Object Pascal can be purely procedural, or purely object-oriented, or contain elements of both paradigms. Software designers and programmers decide how to use those paradigm elements. In object-oriented programming, programmers can think of a program as a collection of interacting objects, while in functional programming a program can be thought of as a sequence of stateless function evaluations. When programming computers or systems with many processors, process-oriented programming allows programmers to think about applications as sets of concurrent processes acting upon logically shared data structures. 
 Many programming paradigms are as well known for what methods they forbid as for what they enable. For instance, pure functional programming forbids using side-effects; structured programming forbids using goto statements. Partly for this reason, new paradigms are often regarded as doctrinaire or overly rigid by those accustomed to earlier styles.[citation needed Avoiding certain methods can make it easier to prove theorems about a program's correctness, or simply to understand its behavior. 
 Grady Booch's object-oriented design (OOD), also known as object-oriented analysis and design (OOAD). The Booch model includes six diagrams: class, object, state transition, interaction, module, and process. 
 A software framework is a re-usable design or implementation for a software system or subsystem. 
 Open Source documentations, via libraries such as GitHub, provide free code for software developers to re-use and implement into new applications or designs. 
 ^ System Development Methodologies for Web-Enabled E-Business: A Customization Framework Linda V. Knight (DePaul University, USA), Theresa A. Steinbach (DePaul University, USA) and Vince Kellen (Blue Wolf, USA) 
 ^ Joseph M. Morris (2001). Software Industry Accounting. p.1.10 
 ^ Alan M. Davis. Great Software Debates (October 8, 2004), pp:125-128 Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Press 
 ^ Otero, Carlos. "Software Design Challenges". IT Performance Improvement. Taylor & Francis LLC. Retrieved 19 October 2017. 
 ^ Kuhn, D.L (1989). "Selecting and effectively using a computer-aided software engineering tool". Annual Westinghouse computer symposium; 6-7 Nov 1989; Pittsburgh, PA (USA); DOE Project. 
 ^ P. Loucopoulos and V. Karakostas (1995). System Requirements Engineering. McGraw-Hill. 
 ^ K. Robinson (1992). Putting the Software Engineering into CASE. New York : John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
 Kit, Edward (1992). Software Testing in The Real World. Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 0201877562. 
 McCarthy, Jim (1995). Dynamics of Software Development. Microsoft Press. ISBN 1556158238. 
 Conde, Dan (2002). Software Product Management: Managing Software Development from Idea to Product to Marketing to Sales. Aspatore Books. ISBN 1587622025. 
 Davis, A. M. (2005). Just enough requirements management: Where software development meets marketing. Dorset House Publishing Company, Incorporated. ISBN 0932633641. 
 Hasted, Edward (2005). Software That Sells: A Practical Guide to Developing and Marketing Your Software Project. Wiley Publishing. ISBN 0764597833. 
 Hohmann, Luke (2003). Beyond Software Architecture: Creating and Sustaining Winning Solutions. Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 0201775948. 
 John W. Horch (2005). "Two Orientations On How To Work With Objects." In: IEEE Software. vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Mar., 1995. 
 Rittinghouse, John (2003). Managing Software Deliverables: A Software Development Management Methodology. Digital Press. ISBN 155558313X. 
 Wiegers, Karl E. (2005). More About Software Requirements: Thorny Issues and Practical Advice. Microsoft Press. ISBN 0735622671. 
 Wysocki, Robert K. (2006). Effective Software Project Management. Wiley. ISBN 0764596365. 
 Top 10 Programming Languages of the World – 2019 to begin with… 
 If you are a newbie in the field of software development, the very first question comes to your mind is “Where to begin?” That’s undoubtedly true! 
 There are hundreds to choose from, but how will you discover that yes, that’s the one? Which will be most suitable for you, your interests and career goals? 
 One of the easiest ways to pick the best programming language to learn for 2019 is by listening to what the market says, where the tech trend is going… 
 Moving down, you will find some of the best and most demanding programming languages for web development, mobile development, game development and more. 
 At the very end, you’ll be having a clear picture of which programming languages can help your career boost in upcoming years and beyond that. 
 It seems impossible to be a software developer these days without using JavaScript. The first one in the list is JavaScript, it seems impossible to imagine software development without JavaScript. 
 Looking at the Stack Overflow’s 2018 Developer Survey, JavaScript is the most popular language among developers successively for 6 years. And around 65% of them have used this language in the past year. 
 Primarily, JavaScript is light weighed, interpreted and plays a major role in front-end development. Even some of the major social media platforms believe that JavaScript provides an easy way to create interactive web pages smoothly and is career-driven. 
 JavaScript is most preferred because of its compatibility with all the major browsers and is really flexible with the syntax it holds. Being a Front-end language, JavaScript is also used on the server-side through Node.js. 
 Above all make JavaScript loveliest programming language among the beginners. 
 This may surprise you; I have kept python on number #2, in many of the surveys it is positioned on number #5. But, I will definitely let you believe, here’s why? 
 Python is one of the general purpose, user-friendly programming language here on my list. What makes it so? Like Java, Python syntax is clear, intuitive and almost similar to the English language. Python’s “object-based” subset is somewhere similar to JavaScript. 
 According to Stack Overflow, there is one section which says “To be adopted or migrated to be—or to migrate too soon”, and for python, it’s 12% which is highest. Broadly, people who have migrated to python are close to 42%, which signifies it to be at number #2. 
 If you are interested in making your career in back-end development, like Django – Open source framework, is written in python, which makes it easy to learn and feature-packed, yet popular. Also, python has a variety of applications that make it a versatile and powerful. 
 Being so popular in areas like scientific computing, and machine learning and engineering, Python supports a programming style that uses simple functions and variables without much interrogating in class definitions. 
 If anybody asks why java, most frequent sentence comes up would be “write once, run everywhere” – Java has been the ruling programming language for the last 20 years. Java is 99% object-oriented and is robust as java objects contain no references to data external to themselves. It is simpler than C++ because Java uses automatic memory allocation and garbage collection. 
 Java is highly cross-platform compatible or platform independent. Since you can code anywhere (I mean on all devices), compile into low-level machine code, and finally, execute on any platform using JVM – Java Virtual Machine (which is platform dependent). 
 Java forms the base for the Android operating system and opted around 90% fortune 500 companies for making a variety of back-end applications. I would not hesitate for taking the biggest sensation Apache Hadoop data processing, run by Amazon Web Services and Windows Azure. 
 With so many good reasons and a wide range of business applications, possessing immense flexibility and java is all time beginners’ favorite. 
 “Old is gold” – C has proved this quote in different ways. Being introduced in the late 1970s, C has made a strong contribution to the world of programming. 
 C has been the parent language of a handful; some are either derived from C or inspired by its syntax, constructs, and paradigms, including Java, Objective-C, and C#. 
 Even, nowadays, it is seen, whenever there is a need to build high-performance applications, C remains the most popular choice. 
 Linux OS is C based. And CPP is the hybrid version of C. C++ is an object-oriented programming language and which is built on C; therefore it is preferred over others for designing higher-level applications. 
 C++ is seeing as more performing than dynamically typed languages because the code is type-checked before it is executed on real grounds. Core areas of developments are Virtual Reality, gaming, computer graphics etc. 
 This fact would seriously amaze you, the language which was created for a purpose of maintaining Personal Home Page (PHP) for Rasmus, have actually taken over around 83% of websites globally by today. 
 PHP stands for Hypertext Preprocessor, is a general-purpose programming language. Clearly, PHP is a scripting language, which runs on a server, and it is used to create web pages written in HTML. It is popular because it is free, cheap, easy to set up and simple to use for new programmers. 
 PHP is a very strong option for web developers around the globe. It is widely used to create dynamic web page content, and images used on websites. It’s hitting on number #5 because of its broad range of usage. Also, PHP is well dressed for WordPress CMS (Content Management System). 
 One of the reason, it has lagged down to number #5, PHP downgrades the website performance and affects the loading time. 
 6. Swift 
 Next on the list is Swift. As smooth as its name, Swift is a general-purpose, open-source, compiled programming language developed by Apple Inc. If you are looking develop to native iOS or Mac OS apps then, Swift is barely needed for its development. 
 Swift is deeply influenced by Python and Ruby and was designed to be beginner-friendly and fun to use. Swift is considered to be a faster, more secure, and easier to read and debug than its predecessor Objective-C. 
 Unlike Objective-C, Swift requires less code, resembles with natural English. Hence, it becomes easier for existing techies from JavaScript, Java, Python, C#, and C++ to switch to Swift without hassle. 
 Besides this, some of the challenges are its limited talent pool. You may not find many Swift developers around you as compared to other open source languages. Recent surveys say, only 8.1% of the 78, 000 respondents use Swift, which is lesser compared to others. And due to frequent updates, Swift is considered to be less stable with every new release. 
 C-sharp is a powerful, object-oriented programming language developed by Microsoft in 2000. C-sharp is utilized in developing desktop applications and more recently, Windows 8/10 applications and requires a .NET framework to function. 
 Microsoft developed C# as a rival to Java. Actually, Sun did not want the interference of Microsoft to make changes in Java. So, it was created. 
 C# has a variety of features which makes it easier to learn for the beginners. The code is consistent, and logical as compared to C++. 
 Spotting errors in C# are easy as it is statically typed language, where the code is checked before turning it to an application. 
 In short, it is perfect to develop web applications, desktop application and also proved itself in VR, 2D, and 3D gaming. Cross-platform tools like Xamarin have written in C# makes it all devices compatible. 
 8. Ruby 
 An open source, dynamic programming language, focused on simplicity and productivity, developed in mid-1990 in Japan. It was designed with themed of simplifying the programming environment and making more fun. 
 Ruby becomes popular by Ruby on Rails framework, a full-stack web framework. Ruby has dynamically typed language, it does not have hard rules and it is a high-level language which resembles with the English language to a great extent. 
 In short, you can build an application with less line of code. But the challenge of Ruby is being dynamically typed language, it’s not easy to maintain and its flexibility makes it’s slow. 
 9. Objective-C 
 Objective-C (ObjC) is an object-oriented programming language. It is used by Apple for the OS X and iOS operating systems and their application programming interfaces (APIs). It was developed in the 1980s and came in usage by some of the earliest operating systems. 
 Objective-C is object-oriented, general purpose. You can call it hybrid C because of the features it adds to C programming language. 
 SQL (es-que-el) stands for Structured Query Language, is a programming language to operate databases. It includes storing, manipulating and retrieving data stored in a relational database. 
 SQL keeps data precise and secure, and it also helps in maintaining the integrity of databases, irrespective of its size. 
 SQL is used today across web frameworks and database applications. If you are well versed in SQL, you can have better command over data exploration, and effective decision making. 
 If you are planning to opt database management as your career, first go through C or C++. SQL developers are in great demand and offered high pay scales by reputed organizations. 
 Wrapping up! 
 Since, the software industry changes with every new update or release. “What is the best programming language of the world?” is hard. If you want to start your career as a developer, it is only you who can decide which one is best suited as per your interest in varying fields. 
 Let’s choose: 
 Front-end web development – JavaScript 
 Back-end web development – JavaScript, Python, Java, PHP, Ruby 
 Desktop application – Java, C++, Python 
 Mobile development – Swift, Java, C# 
 Game development – C++, C# 
 Once again, here is the list of top 10 programming languages to start with: 
 JavaScript 
 Python 
 Java 
 C/CPP 
 PHP 
 Swift 
 C# 
 Ruby 
 Objective – C 
 SQL 
 How strong you are agreeing with me, what you feel about these tech trends. Share with your comments! 
 If you like GeeksforGeeks and would like to contribute, you can also write an article using contribute.geeksforgeeks.org or mail your article to contribute@geeksforgeeks.org. See your article appearing on the GeeksforGeeks main page and help other Geeks. 
 Please Improve this article if you find anything incorrect by clicking on the "Improve Article" button below. 
